Talking to Owen Gingrich, Harvard.
Let's talk before we get on about Haven O'Moore, because I'm really excited, and I don't want you to think that I'm here to talk principally about Haven O'Moore.
I certainly want to talk to you about him if you want to talk to me about him, but I am really excited about what you've been doing with the practice, and I was going through the census here.
By the way, you will be publishing a census, I gather,
Yes, this is all machine-readable copy you're looking at, and I am in the process of converting it into camera-ready copy.
This was just very much a trial where nowhere close to getting it into
book form yet, but there will be about 550 copies of the book described, both the first and second edition.
All of them, with this complete provenance, says it has been possible to establish.
And who will be publishing the book?
It will be published by Brill and Leiden, because they are the publishers of the Studia Kopernikana series of the Polish Academy of Sciences.
And because of the support, I've had very helpful
collaboration with their scholars, I agreed I would publish it in their series, providing there would be a Western publisher.
And now that they have, I mean, the Eastern Bloc has sort of broken loose, they can go out and be capitalists and get Brill to do it for them.
Could you just say what you mean by censorship?
Did they in fact, did owners at some point censor material out of the book?
This was a very specific project of the
Catholic Index of Prohibited Books.
You will see here in the book, this is the index of prohibited books.
Have you ever seen an index before?
The index of prohibited books gets printed over and over and over again.
Most of them are rather small, more or less pocket-sized ones.
This is a rather handsome one.
This is published in 1664, so it's
sufficiently later that it has everything re-alphabetized.
If you want to find out about Copernicus, you don't look under C. You find it here under N. Nicholas Copernicus, De revolutionibus orbium, unless corrected.
It goes on the index in the decree of 1616.
It is permitted if it's corrected according to the decree of 1620.
So the decree of 1620
is here in the back of the book, and we'll have to find it.
It's in pretty nice shape.
Oh, these early books aren't on brittle paper.
Now, the important thing to understand, I think, is that this is extremely unusual.
It is the only book for which the
Holy Congregation actually spelled out how it was to be censored.
Now, in most copies, or many books, it says, permitted if corrected.
But they don't bother to say what the corrections are.
I guess they think it's obvious.
But Copernicus's book is so unusual because they decided they couldn't take out the heliocentrism.
All they could do is to make the book appear
more hypothetical.
So there are 10 or a dozen specific places where you're supposed to cross off text and add new text or else simply cross off the text or change a chapter heading.
Cross off by 10 or actually physically exercise the expensive material?
Did you look at all of this other article that was... I read that article.
In fact, I'm going to see if I can call it.
That's going to be in my other anthology called
the Eye of Heaven, and that's what I'm just now working on.
Well, here you can see an example of a censored copy in which, in this particular case, is Galileo's, and he didn't cross out anything very heavily, so he can still read it.
Sometimes it's crossed out so heavily that the paper falls out, because the gallic acid in the ink keeps right through.
Sometimes,
It's little strips of paper pasted over it, in which case the bookworms love that toothpaste.
And sometimes the worms have done what the owners didn't intend, which is to have the text on the backside destroyed by the worms going through.
Okay, so, and here's the map.
I've just redone this.
I just took it over to the artist this morning.
This shows where the copies were in 1620.
And that is possible because you've seen all the provenances.
So the black ones are the censored ones.
So you can see they were not effective in Spain.
And in the new one, I've just drawn their copies here and here, which are not censored.
I have added a number of additional copies for Spain.
It was seen very much as a local Italian imbroglio.
But you can tell instantly, and looking at a copy, whether it's censored or not censored.
And therefore, if it's an Italian copy, probably.
No, no, no, it's always censored in Latin.
I see.
Yeah, because the book's in Latin.
But I mean, had it been owned in Italy, is that just what I'm saying?
Had it been owned in Italy, it's still censored in Latin.
Okay.
But I mean, was it Italian-owned is what I'm saying?
Yeah, that's right.
I mean, and almost all those censored copies were Italian-owned.
Now, of course, the continual stirring of books by the sale and resale of them
and put censored copies in Sweden and England and the U.S.
and so on.
That's just how books travel around.
Explain to me, and I know it's written, but explain to me why this census is so important to you.
It's got to be more than an exercise to find every copy.
Oh.
I first found a wonderfully annotated copy in...
Edinburgh, which was done by the leading teacher in the generation after Copernicus.
And I thought to myself, that's interesting to see how this material was being taught in 1550.
I wonder what I'll find by looking at other copies.
And I started looking at other copies and making very rudimentary notes, either it's annotated or it's not annotated.
But as I got into it, I realized that there was a lot of interesting information to be had by looking at the provenances because you could see what the book history was.
So I started all over again and went back to the places and got much better handle on everything that was written in the book that gave indication of where it had been.
Then I had got up to 100.
Did you have it personally handled, by the way?
That's right.
Identified in... A hundred first editions.
And I figured, well, I've got enough statistics.
This is a good stopping point.
But I was in Rome.
It was 1973, the quinquicentennial year for Copernicus.
And there were more books in Rome than any other place where I hadn't looked.
And I thought, well, this is too good an opportunity.
I went to the Vatican Library and...
this incident is described in the piece in the Great Copernicus Chase Anthology, that I went in and found that it was, here was another wonderfully annotated copy, and that it was obvious that it had been copied from Erasmus Reinhold's copy, which was that first one I had seen in Edinburgh.
And then,
Very shortly after that, I mean, within a matter of a couple of days, I discovered that the hand in it was exactly the same as in the copy that was attributed to Tycho Brahe, which is in Prague.
So I began to understand for the first time that a person might own more than one copy.
It took a lot of work and a number of years to show that what had been
believed to be Tico's copy for many decades was, in fact, not his handwriting, but belonged to a very obscure itinerant scholar who never published anything, who therefore nearly perished, named Paul Vidic, and that he had not one but four copies.
Wow.
And then it became much more of a game when it was clear
that the annotations were copied from one book to another to be as complete as possible, because you never could tell what was lurking in those few that you hadn't looked at yet in terms of connections between what was there.
For instance, in the famous Corblet O'Moore copy,
of the Copernicus.
There is a long Greek poem written in the beginning of it.
And so in the course of the researches, I had been to Parma in Italy, and I had asked to see the copy there, and they couldn't find it.
They not only couldn't find it, but they showed me the hole on the shelf where it was supposed to be filed.
So I thought, hmm, that's interesting.
My colleague then told me, oh, that was missing over a year ago when I tried to find it.
And I thought, that's interesting.
And I remembered that in the card catalog there had been something special about it.
And it said this is prefixed with a Greek poem written by Camerarius.
So I thought, uh-oh, this is very suspicious that this book has appeared on the market sometime after World War II.
Maybe a hungry librarian sold it or something.
So I wrote to Parma to ask them how long it had been missing and so on.
And I got back the letter in Italian and I showed it to one of my colleagues here, an astronomer from Italy.
He looked at me and said, this isn't written in Italian.
This is written in legalese.
And he said it was the most, you know, guarded kind of letter to protect the flying from
from Parma.
So... I bet you went into a lot of this when you've gone along.
Oh, yes.
Well, I asked, then the book by that time belonged to Haven or more, so I asked Haven if I could see the book, and he brought it in, and we went down to a closet that we could make absolutely black, and I turned my ultraviolet light on it and scanned the whole thing to see if there was any evidence of a book plate removed, a signature removed, anything.
And there was just absolutely no ownership marks from Parma at all in the book.
And I was very, very puzzled because it just seemed to me such an open-and-check case that this had come from Parma.
And this whole episode taught me a very interesting lesson because a few years later, a European bookseller called me to say that he was on to a very interesting copy of Copernicus and he'd like to talk to me about it.
So I went to see him, and he showed me Xeroxes of, guess what, a poem in Greek in the hand of Camerarius in a copy of the book that I had never seen and I have never seen.
He said, this is very odd.
He said, I got a telephone call long distance from a party that couldn't be traced asking me if I would be interested in certain books, and I said I was.
And so the next thing that arrived was this pack of Xeroxes, including this one.
He said, frankly, this is the only really interesting book in the lot, and from what you tell me, he said, it's undoubtedly the copy stolen from Parma.
He says the problem was there was no return address on the package that you could use to trace back.
And then they never got in touch again?
As far as I know, they never got in touch again.
They must have been scared.
They must have been scared, and what I'm afraid is that they will cut that page out before they try to sell it.
Before we went on the tape, you had said that the Horvillet, O'Moore, and Alexander and Copernicus is the most important copy of Private Hands.
And could you... You can basically read that in the Garden Limited Sale catalog.
Right.
But for reasons stated, those are the reasons in the Garden catalog.
That's why... I wrote this description in this... Oh, you did?
...in the catalog.
It was very... How did that happen?
The self-defense contract?
Do you want to ask the decision?
Sure.
I wrote a couple of the descriptions here.
But Haven O'Moore was very sensitive about it.
I never saw him during this process, but it was plain that he was looking at all of the text on a very regular basis.
Of the catalog?
Of the catalog.
They got back to me and they said, wouldn't you please say such and such?
And I would say, no, you know, that's not honest.
I said I would help you, you know, if you then don't rewrite the copy.
So Haven was always, as he was, whenever I saw him, always keen to make his copy the very best.
He wanted his to be the only four-star copy.
Wouldn't I please make it a four-star copy?
Who were you dealing with?
Jay Dillon itself used probably?
Yeah, among others, basically.
Very interesting.
So there was this continual feedback.
And we finally got it tuned in a way that I was satisfied that they hadn't perjured themselves, and that Avon was satisfied that the copy came out strong enough.
It's not signed, though.
I don't think it's signed, no.
that they went upside down?
Oh, I think they did on... Sure, that makes perfect sense.
Probably on a number of the books.
But I did both the narratio prima and this, and I think in both cases it actually says that they thanked me for doing it.
Okay.
Now, let's see.
These are in order of date, I believe.
That's okay.
I'll look this up.
There's the Copernicus.
Wow.
Is that the original binding, by the way?
See, we are grateful to Professor Owen Gingrich's generous assistance with this description and for his permission to quote from his translation of the autographed poem of Camerarius.
So... Yeah, yeah.
That's original.
Yeah, yeah, blind-stamped pigskin.
And, of course, what I found inside was something here that starts out with CO under the ultraviolet.
Haven was very excited.
He wanted me to make it say Copernicus, as if Copernicus would have written his name in it.
But there was no way this could have been because Copernicus died, essentially, on the day that they
final pages arrived.
Did these urchings abuse you?
Well, I sort of let them flow off like water off a duck's back, but I could see what he was up to.
What was his reaction about the prospect of losing these books?
Did he show anything?
Well, obviously he was upset about it.
I didn't, but I didn't talk to him in this final stage.
Nobody else, not many people did, actually.
But he was obviously in close connection with them there.
You see, here they published my census of the copies, and again, they say thanks.
I looked at some of the other descriptions, too, but I didn't work on them that heavily.
Let's go back to the earlier narrative that we were developing here.
Well, anyway, even to the last moment, in the sense that interesting things have turned up as a result of continuing to pursue it, so that one of the final copies I've managed to see in bringing it to an end in the Lennon State Library, I had been stonewalled about for
for many years in seeing this copy.
There was always some excuse or another why I couldn't see it.
They told me it was in conservation.
And when I finally saw it, January a year ago, I realized that it had never needed conservation and never been in conservation.
So I asked them bluntly what was going on, and they said the Lennon State Library has hundreds of clandestine books taken from Germany at the end of World War II.
They're in a kind of gray area.
In one sense, they're war reparations.
In another sense, by the Geneva Conventions, they're cultural artifacts.
And they just didn't want foreigners messing around.
You have no idea what's in there, then?
No, but we know they must have backed up a truck to the Leopoldina, famous Natural History Academy in Halle, in East Germany, and just taken the whole library.
And I said earlier that you can't tell about books missing from Berlin.
The copy in the Berlin State Library was missing, and I assumed it had been destroyed in the bombings and the destruction at the very end of the war.
But I finally decided, okay, since we know a little bit about this book, I'll include it in the census because it has a provenance.
even though it's been destroyed.
So there was a name inside it.
And as is my custom in making the fences, I look up all the previous owners to find out where they were.
And this was Heinrich Hoffmann, Johann Heinrich Hoffmann.
And I looked him up.
in biographical sources, and it had an astonishing familiar ring to it, and I said, wait a minute, this book from Berlin is someplace else in the census.
And it took a while to find it, and you'll notice, and my notes were very interesting, because I had, and the original notes had written,
there is this repair in the center of the title page which looks as if it has been done to conceal an earlier ownership.
And in fact, it was.
They had removed the book plate.
So maybe when they told me this other book had to be in conservation, they meant they hadn't yet had a chance to eliminate all the early marks.
I have a chapter on book sets, by the way, and this is very useful.
this will get in there.
I'm not going to tell you all the rest of my booksept stories today.
I've got to save some of them for my other books that I've been involved with, Interpol, and so on.
Did this become an obsession with you?
Oh, it's obviously Don Quixote Plus.
I mean, I've been tilting at this particular windmill in a way that I really want to see all possible copies so that I wouldn't have
I probably wouldn't have taken that trip to Moscow just to see a single book, except I knew it was very well annotated, and I really wanted to know where it fit in the scheme of things.
Why is it important that you personally handle every book?
Well, to begin with, most librarians can't read them, can't read the writing.
It is so many different hands, and there are so many different clues that one can
can pick up by looking at the book directly.
And librarians will look at a book rather casually and tell you, no, it's not annotated.
And you go and look at it, and you find that if you're very careful and turn every page, there are interesting things written there.
So that in many, many cases, I could have accomplished the same thing just by asking them all to each to send me a microfilm.
Not every place is prepared to make a microfilm.
One of the very interesting copies, from my point of view, is in Soissons in France.
And I asked, when I saw the annotations, I said I need to have copies of these.
They said, we're a small place.
We have no possibility in this town to get it microfilmed.
If you want to take your own pictures, why don't you do it?
So I had color film in the camera, so I essentially did a microfilm on color slides.
And I'm sorry I don't have more of them.
now that I come back to look at the book, because it turns out to be one of five or six copies that have the same set of annotations.
And it wasn't until last month when my colleague Doug Jitsky was here that we thought about it and worked on it hard enough to finally figure out how come there were these six copies.
They come from another little-known guy who is apparently a tutor and
It was basically operating out of Paris in the 1550s.
Why is one book worth all this work, all this energy, all this travel, all this scholarship that you've created?
Well, it's the first time anybody's really done this for any book at all, to show what the book movements have been, the pattern of losses of books, what the survival is of
You'll get a lot of information.
It feeds back, enables us to estimate how big the edition was.
A lot of interesting information comes out very indirectly on the interaction between Copernicus and the printer, which was located at quite a distance from him.
We find out basically how the book was being studied.
We found out that it was
really quite extensively studied.
I think I'm going to call my other book the book nobody read.
Well, you call it Arthur Kessler, right?
Because of, it's coming from Arthur Kessler, who has branded it the book that nobody read, and it took about 10 years to prove that he was completely wrong.
Is that, is that quote, is that statement of his, is that one of the catalysts?
No, not really.
It was just that in the process of doing this, I suddenly realized that I had rather demolished that particular statement.
Do you think that was a rather arrogant statement, or just an uninformed?
There was no way he could have been better informed about it at the time, but he, in many instances, somewhat overgeneralized.
And how did you start with this book?
I mean, you gave me the description earlier about what started the census, but yourself... It was in part because in 1973 was the quinquin centennial, and I was, at that point, beginning to get heavily involved in the history of astronomy, and I knew with a big celebration like that, everybody would expect talks and lectures and so on, and I was wondering, you know, what could there be a need to say?
Copernicus has been studied for centuries.
And suddenly I realized that here was a niche that nobody else had taken up at all.
The result of all this was that I have become an expert about a particular book in a way that hardly anybody else ever has.
There is, of course, an old and quite out of date census of the first folios of Shakespeare.
The Gutenberg Bibles, the Bayes Sound Book.
Of course, there are only 11 Bayes Sound Books.
There is the Elephant Folio of John James Audit, which was too easy because there was a list of subscribers printed in it.
That's exactly right.
But the Bayes Sound Book, there were only 11, and six of them came from Thomas Prince's collection, so we start a pretty easy thing to do.
Having identified this niche for yourself,
Do you think that that scholarship has new knowledge about Copernicus?
I mean, not just on his achievement, but on the history, on the reading history of the book and how it may have influenced... Well, yes, there's a considerable information that turns up about the ebb and flow of astronomy in the rest of that century.
There is another thing that you should probably look at, and...
I'll have to go in the other room to get you a copy of it.
But in fact, I made a list of the articles that have been written about the census in one aspect or another, and there are, I suppose, 10 of them.
So it has, in addition to the census, has had a continuing stream of
of scholarly articles.
I'll lend you a copy of this, but I really would like to get it back.
How about if I... Do you mind if I copy some pages out of it?
No, no, no.
Copy some pages.
That's no problem.
I'll get it back to you by the end of the week.
Okay, fine.
It describes one of the very interesting groups of copies.
In fact, those that were attributed to Tycho Brahe, which then turned out to be Paul Wittig.
As I say, and he's got four copies, and just last month we found this other very similar sort of person who's even more mysterious, who has, between himself and his students, six copies.
Wow.
Have you become a borderline biblio main on...
in the pursuit of this one book?
I mean, would you like to own a... I would like to own a copy of it, but it's always been a situation that I would have had to mortgage the house in order to own it.
And so I own a second edition, but not a first.
But what do you feel?
Do you feel anything physically when you handle the first, or is it really a scholarly... Yeah, I've looked at it so often that it's one, and I've
And I've had a number of times I've had copies here in the office for some weeks.
So I can't exactly say how many copies have passed through this office, but a number of them.
It's 20 years, right, that you've been involved in this?
Yeah.
Did you have any idea that it would be?
No, no, I don't know.
I certainly would have done a lot of things differently if I'd known what it was going to lead to.
For instance...
There are so many of these little libraries in provincial towns in Germany and Italy, I think I would have made my own Michelin type of maps on how to find the library.
Scholars would think this was great to be able to buy a set of maps, because in general, you get wonderful little town maps, but they don't necessarily show you where the library is.
We got fairly good at it.
We would make a beeline for the train station.
go in there because almost invariably there would be a map of the town and see where in the world this library was.
And then we would head straight to it.
It often meant going to two and occasionally even three libraries in a day.
And when I was doing my main field trips, one had to be very carefully organized so that on a Sunday
you were at a place that had wonderful museums because, in general, the libraries weren't open on Sunday.
Have you, in fact, handled every book that you described?
No.
There are about five copies I haven't seen.
Wow.
But there are more than that stolen now or have disappeared into the market, so I've actually handled more copies than are now located.
Oh, and if anybody can say that
About any book?
I mean, any great book?
That's probably unique.
I've formed the Petraeus Society, named after the printer of the book, and it's limited to those people who've looked at a hundred copies or more.
And how many members are there?
I believe there are four of us, including my wife.
And did your wife share this story?
Well, she likes to come to libraries, and she's been a beneficiary of a lot of travel.
Can you think of any other books, great books, that could dare or that deserve this kind of inquiry?
I'm sure one is enough for your lifetime, but I'm wondering.
Yeah, if I had it to do again, I would probably simultaneously look at Kepler's Astronomia Nova.
I might just try to get some feeling about that by sending out letters on it.
I've located where there are 70 copies of that.
I've done the greatest piece of printing of the 16th century, which is the Appianus Astronomicum Caesarium.
Have you ever seen that book?
I have seen something over 100 copies of that book.
I think they have one at the Lilly Library.
They do.
So I've collated them, and that's such a complicated book because of all the moving parts that it's an interesting book to collate.
Quite a story, and you know, it is ironic in a way, and I don't mean to overuse that word, but the whole purpose of printing is to replicate.
And really, I'm supposed to know where all the copies go.
And then what you try to do is go back.
To undo the scattering of the feathers to the wind.
There you go.
I couldn't have said it.
I mean, you mindfully were doing this, I guess, to try and go back.
And to assess the influence, you have to find out as best you can where the books went.
That's a pretty spectacular thing to do.
Yes, because all of the finding aids are set up.
with the idea in mind that you should be able to find a copy of a book if you need it.
But they're not set up to find all copies of the book.
And not only all copies, but to try and determine who has owned them through the centuries and how they may have influenced thought events.
Pretty bold adventure.
It's interesting.
You find curious things in the process.
For example,
Cambridge, England, Oxford, the main university libraries did not ever have a first edition of this book until the last century.
Now, the reason was that the book trade in England was very restricted because of the stationer's company and the business of importing books and so on.
But most of the books
Most of the first edition of Copernicus's book got into England by individual scholars who had worked on the continent, bringing them back.
By that time, the book had a reputation so that when the second edition was published in Basel, the books came in in droves, so to say, so that the Bodleian had four copies of the second edition by 1650.
But they didn't get a first edition until the 19th century because of antiquarian interest.
And in both cases, both Cambridge and Oxford then got it through a benefactor because they were by that time getting interested in the antiquarian aspect.
You mentioned in one of your notes in the census, and I just saw it briefly, that a communication with Julian Roberts at the Bodleian, who I interviewed two years ago when I was there,
And it was right after the garden sale, and I had mentioned how the Don Quixote went for 1.6 million payments, Don Quixote, which went to a Spanish collector.
And his line was, well, we got ours when it was issued.
They had a bookseller in Spain, 1616 or whatever it was, I think it was published prior to that, and they bought it.
But he said, we never got a first folio until the late 1900s.
British writers, English writers, they didn't collect at the Bodleian.
It's very kind of inconsistent with what you just described.
Yeah, it's somewhat capricious.
Julian Roberts was very, very helpful to me because in the Bodleian, the books are still classified by the benefactions.
So he took me down to the stacks so that I could see what other kind of books were coming.
with the Copernicus each time.
I've got so good that I can sort of spot the word Copernicus on a sheet of newsprint, so that I went through the donors' books, the vellum-bound books in which all the donations had been written, and managed to find every one of their Copernicus books so that I knew where it had come from, which is, you know, scanning a lot of entries before those words jumped out.
This will probably...
The census will be published, you hope, next year.
I hope.
And does that, in your mind, conclude the quixotic way?
The problem is they do keep coming out of the woodwork.
Like, for instance, Jack Pickett, as I mentioned, this is a little wrinkle.
He gave it to his son-in-law.
Yeah, but, I mean, it's a copy I've seen, so that's okay.
It's copies that are totally unknown to me.
like a second edition, which just turned up in the sale in Germany a few weeks ago.
What happens to you when you see something like that?
Is it an unrecorded copy?
It's an unrecorded copy.
Or a copy that you haven't recorded?
It's a copy.
Nobody's recorded.
And I got in touch with the auctioneer right away, and he said, oh,
We knew you'd seen the first edition.
We didn't realize you were going after the second edition as well.
That's so funny.
We will try to tell you where it's gone.
But before he had a chance to tell me where it's gone, the grapevine had worked and I had found out.
How did this feed in with your teaching and your work here?
Oh, I regale the students with tales of book hunting from time to time.
Now, it doesn't directly, but when I give a lecture, let's say, to the sophomores who are just joining the history science program, I include some of the flavor of this because it can give them a hint about the excitement of the chase.
And you have been a detective, a literary detective, and that's some kind of fun, I guess.
One has to be in order to...
keep track of where the books are.
It's interesting because you saw the foreword probably to the great Copernicus case where I described being in federal district court.
That copy has now escaped my net because it was sold at auction and bought by Jake Zeitlin, but Jake Zeitlin has died, and no
obvious record was kept as to where he sent the book.
He was always very free in telling me where the books went, and that just got through.
Where did his records go?
His records have been taken over by one of his junior colleagues, who said it would be like looking at a needle in a haystack to find it.
Well, somebody should do that.
Somebody could do that for you.
Well, sometime.
I mean, the records are there, but the obvious places in the records, he looked and didn't find it.
And it was owned jointly with the 19th Century Bookshop in Baltimore, and they say, Jake handled it, and they haven't a clue.
Strange.
Yeah.
Maybe I can help on that.
We'll see.
Hold on.
Have you talked to Mel Edelstein at the Getty?
He's very close to Jake, and he did the oral history of Jake, right?
Yeah.
It's big.
I see.
Well, if you come across anything on it, I'd be fascinated to know.
I'm writing my California chapter right now, so I'm in this stuff.
If we could talk a little bit about Mr. O'Moore, I'd be fascinated to have you tell me.
You said that there was a story going around through the grapevine that he actually had talked about.
taking the library and putting it into... Into orbit, and I haven't any idea at this point who mentioned that or how serious it was.
Knowing Haven, he could very well have come up with a bizarre idea like that.
Well, if you read the introduction to this, getting the library ready for the great movement towards the stars, I mean, if you take him at his word,
of what the library was intended for.
It's consistent with what he says in that book.
Okay.
I mean, when you said that, I was speechless.
But then I thought, do I believe it?
Yeah, I do.
I mean, I believe it being something... I guess you think you get to know him pretty well.
Well, I don't suppose anybody knew him very well, but I knew him.
I mean, we met...
reasonably often and i would occasionally call him up about something or other did he ever indicate how great his collection was oh he often told me what was in it did you ever express an interest in seeing any of it or did he ever offer you enough he basically didn't offer to show me other things as i told you i was very keen uh toward the end to have an opportunity for a
colleague from England to see the John Locke manuscript.
Oh, could you tell me about that?
That's a very interesting story, by the way.
Could you go through that again?
One of the scholars in Keele, in England.
And how do we spell that?
K-E-E-L-E.
Okay.
It's university there.
It's, again, the fact that I got on to him was interesting.
It was because I eventually stumbled on the fact that at Keel there was an interesting collection of science books, and it turns out that there are more books from Isaac Newton's library than any place outside of Cambridge because there was a
a civil servant whose hobby was science books, and he kept buying them.
And eventually, he was looking for some place to send his books, and I don't know how the connection with Keele developed, but he decided that would be an interesting place to put them, so he put them all there, including at Copernicus.
So when I was up to Keele, I talked to him, and
and discovered that he was very interested in in john locke because he was putting out the edition of on human understanding for oxford university press do you remember the scholars not instantaneously i could probably dig it up at some point i might follow i'd be curious anyway let's continue well in any event uh he managed to get some funding to travel
to come over here, and we were arranging so that, okay, he'd come over to give a colloquium at Harvard and he could look at this book.
And Haven agreed that, yeah, he'd let him see it, put it in the library temporarily or something, but he kept saying, it's inconvenient to get it right now, he said.
And he eventually allowed that, in fact, there was a problem because of a court case.
So this must have been about 1988 or 89?
I guess so.
Does that sound right?
Right before the sale.
Okay.
It was the year before the sale.
88 is on the court.
The case started in July of 1988.
Okay.
So we had January of 1988.
I don't know when Haven first told me about the trial.
He and Luria mentioned it several times.
repeatedly that there was some sort of litigation going on that made it difficult to see the books, and that he didn't have easy access to them because they were in the bank vault.
But he said, you know, just wait.
It will be possible for him to see them.
He said, I don't have any objection to his seeing them, but that I can't do it right now.
So eventually I learned that they were all going up for sale, and so I
When Sotheby's asked me about the Copernicus, I asked them about the On Human Understanding manuscript and they said, well, that one is being described in London because it was broken.
Some of them were described in London and some of them were described in New York.
And I said, well, there's an expert on it who very much would like to see it.
And so I contacted him and they arranged for him to come down and
have the chance to look at it.
So he was very pleased to see it.
Ironic, isn't it, in a way that the circumstance under which the scholar gets to see it is in the auction house prior to its dismissal, as opposed to an institution where normally you might think... I have, on a number of occasions, been able to see books in the auction house.
Really?
And one which frustrated me a great deal.
They had assured me I'd be able to see it,
But when I showed up, they said, well, we auctioned it yesterday, and almost invariably people leave the books for us to ship them.
But in this case, it was this anonymous buyer who absolutely insisted on taking it off instantly.
And so they said, we're sorry, but it isn't here anymore.
And I was 24 hours too late to see it.
Eventually, I had the book here in this office, so I did see it.
But it took me well over a year to find out where it had gone.
Did you say that Haven and Luria had indicated that they met?
One of these magnetic moments where she was working in an, I think you said, an aerospace... In an aerospace company.
And she said that... He said?
He said that when he saw her, he was very much struck by her and said...
to his companion with him, you see that girl over there?
I think I'll marry her, or that's the girl I'm going to marry.
And then Maria said she saw him come in, and she was very much struck by his charm, and she was married at the time.
She said she deliberately put her hands under her desk so that he couldn't see the rain.
Wow.
Did he?
So they both verified the story from the two different viewpoints.
What actually interests me more than anything is that he may actually have been in an aerospace plant.
Do you think, in fact, he was doing some kind of consultation for these companies?
That's what he claimed.
He claimed it here, and he claimed it, and I can find no evidence of this.
This is why I'm interested in the story, not so much
about the attraction, but did he actually possible?
Do you think he has the intellect to do the kinds of consultations that he claims?
Weapons development and high-level mathematical things?
I haven't a clue.
Did he impress you as a guy who was fluent in ancient Greek manuscripts and Hebrew manuscripts and could translate these things with ease?
A hundred learned papers might be the measure of his accomplishments.
He always carried on to give that impression and that general aura.
And Pierre Barrette, the dealer in Paris, had often wanted to meet him and had been frustrated in this attempt.
And he said, I am coming to Boston.
Do you think there's any possible way that you could arrange an introduction?
So I said, I think so.
And so I arranged for it, and we all went out to eat together.
And it was a fascinating conversation, because Haven and Beres were spending the entire evening trying to one-up each other.
And Haven's knowledge of literary materials
was good enough to hold his own with the rest for that whole evening.
Do you have some recollection of when this might have been?
After the Arthur Houghton sale, before the Arthur Houghton sale, which is 79 and 80?
My guess is it was soon after that.
You could see basically a riot on the world scene.
It would have been in the early 80s probably.
Because really, if you knew him... I had forgotten about that incident.
I mean, you've jogged my memory, but that was my job.
Because really, if you knew him in 74 or 75, right after, soon after he buzzed, you were one of the few people at that time who knew he was building a major collection.
Now, he was dealing heavily with John Fleming in New York and Warren Howell on the West Coast.
But according to Steven Massey at Christie's, for instance, he really arrived in 79 when he bought Boldly at the Houghton sale in London.
And then everybody in Beres would be another one, yet another.
There's a many number of dealers now who really were quite eager to make his acquaintance.
It's fascinating.
It struck me if I still think.
Let's see.
I was on a sabbatical leave when I met him, and I always have to work out.
Haven, or?
Haven, yeah.
Um... This was, uh, in... 77, I guess.
Okay.
Well, you have 75 as the earliest it could have been, because that's when it was listed in the LDF catalog.
It couldn't have been prior to that.
He had telephoned me before.
Okay.
So I had talked to him on the phone before that.
But, and then, somehow,
He got wind of the fact that I was in Cambridge at the time.
Haven did.
Yeah.
And he called me in Cambridge, indicating that he was not far.
He was at... I can't... No, no, no, no.
I'm talking about Cambridge England.
Oh, I'm sorry.
This is England.
Yeah.
He was at... It's not me, town.
I can't remember.
It's a horse racing town outside of Cambridge.
That must be where Canes had his place.
And he was at the hotel in Cambridge, but had gone over to see him.
Which Canes is it that does the bibliographies?
Here's one of them up on the shelf.
And he was there because they were arranging for a blank exhibition.
And he owned by that time some blanks.
And he was lending them for this exhibition.
Yeah.
He may not have had all of them, but he had the first part of them in there.
He brought heavily from Colin Franklin outside of Oxford.
In fact, I went to interview Franklin at Oxford.
I'm sorry, I interrupted there.
Well, that's okay.
He had been out to see Jeffrey Cain's, and he had taken his Harvey book along in order to show it, in order to get a reading about how good this was.
And he said he was on his way back to London, and I said, what a coincidence, we're going into London because I have some business to do there.
If you want, you can go into London with us.
So the first time I met him was then driving up at the hotel in Cambridge, England, and he and his wife were standing there, and we introduced ourselves, got in the car and drove to London.
You drove?
I drove.
Nicholas Barker, who writes the introduction to this, mentions that he, I think, met Haven once at Haynes' house.
I think it's in that introduction there.
When I interviewed Nicholas Barker... That dovetails, doesn't it?
That was probably the time.
But that's the only time he met Haven.
And I asked him, because he wrote such a wonderful introduction.
And I said, gee, you must have been very impressive how quick it was.